kalyatāṃ mama kuruṣva tāvatīṃ kalyate bhavadupāsanaṃ yayā |
spaṣṭamaṣṭavidhayogacaryayā puṣṭayāśu tava tuṣṭimāpnuyām ||1||
kalyatāṃ	health
mama	for me
kuruṣva	kindly bestow
tāvatīṃ	(at least) that much
kalyate	(by which) I can perform
bhavat-upāsanaṃ	worship of Thee
yayā	by which
spaṣṭam-	definitely
aṣṭa-vidha-yoga-caryayā	by practicing the eight limbed yoga (Ashtanga Yoga)
puṣṭaya-āśu	(I will) be nourished soon
tava tuṣṭim	(with) Thy grace
āpnuyām	I will attain it
O Lord! Bestow on me just that much of health necessary to worship Thee. Then I shall practice the eight-limbed yoga (Ashtanga Yoga) and earn Thy grace.
brahmacaryadṛḍhatādibhiryamairāplavādiniyamaiśca pāvitā: |
kurmahe dṛḍhamamī sukhāsanaṃ paṅkajādyamapi vā bhavatparā: ||2||
brahmacarya-ḍhṛḍhatā-ādibhi:-yamai:-	through the observances of disciplines of self control like strict continence etc.
āplava-ādi-niyamai:-ca	and daily bath like rules of right conduct
pāvitā:	purified thus
kurmahe	(I) we shall practice
dṛḍham-amī	firmly, these
sukhāsanam	the sukhasana
paṅkaja-ādyam-api vā	or the lotus poses etc.
bhavat-parā:	for meditation on Thee
O Lord!I (we all (the devotees) will strictly follow the discipline of Yama (self control) by practice of Brahmcharya etc. and also the discipline of Niyama (rules of right conduct) through routines of daily bath etc. and attain purity of body and mind. I (we) will then practice steady postures (Asanaa) like Sukhaasanaa and Padmaasanaa etc. for meditating on Thee.
tāramantaranucintya santataṃ prāṇavāyumabhiyamya nirmalā: |
indriyāṇi viṣayādathāpahṛtyāsmahe bhavadupāsanonmukhā: ||3||
tāram-antaram-anucintya	Pranava (Om) in the mind repeating
santataṃ	continuously
prāṇa-vāyum-abhiyamya	the breath thus regulating
nirmalā:	and being purified
indriyāṇi viṣayāt-	sense organs from the sense objects
atha-apahṛtya	then withdrawing
āsmahe	(I) we will be
bhavat upāsana-unmukhā:	for meditating on Thee, prepared
O Lord! by regulating my breath through Pranayama and having purified myself I will continuously chant the Pranava (Om) mantra mentally. Thus, withdrawing my senses from the sense objects, and being purified, I will prepare myself for meditation on Thee.
asphuṭe vapuṣi te prayatnato dhārayema dhiṣaṇāṃ muhurmuhu: |
tena bhaktirasamantarārdratāmudvahema bhavadaṅghricintakā ||4||
asphuṭe vapuṣi te	on the hazily perceived form of Thine
prayatnata:	with great effort
dhārayema	(I) we shall fix
dhiṣaṇāṃ	the mind
muhu: muhu:	again and again
tena	by (doing) this
bhaktirasam-anta: - ārdratām-	melting of the heart through the bliss of devotion
udvahema	shall attain
bhavat-aṅghricintakā:	(I) (we who) meditate on Thy holy feet
O Lord! I will then start meditating on Thee. Initially with great effort I shall try to fix my mind on Thy form, which will be vague in the beginning. Practicing thus again and again I shall attain bliss of devotion and tenderness of heart.
visphuṭāvayavabhedasundaraṃ tvadvapu: suciraśīlanāvaśāt |
aśramaṃ manasi cintayāmahe dhyānayoganiratāstvadāśrayāḥ ||5||
visphuṭa-avayava-bheda-sundaraṃ	with distinctly clear limbs and very beautiful
tvat-vapu:	Thy form
sucira-śīlanāvaśāt	by long practice
aśramaṃ manasi	without any effort in the mind
cintayāmahe	(I) we shall contemplate
dhyāna-yoga-niratā:-	intent on meditation
tvat-āśrayāḥ	(I) we who have taken refuge in Thee
O Lord! I, Thy devotee, by long practice will be able to visualize in my mind Thy beautiful form with all limbs clear and vivid. So I will devote myself to meditation, without any effort, always surrendering to Thee.
dhyāyatāṃ sakalamūrtimīdṛśīmunmiṣanmadhuratāhṛtātmanām |
sāndramodarasarūpamāntaraṃ brahma rūpamayi te'vabhāsate ||6||
dhyāyatāṃ	to those who meditate (on)
sakala-mūrtim-īdṛśīm-	such a formful aspect (the Saguna form)
unmiṣan-madhuratā-hṛt-ātmanām	(and so) experiencing sweetness whose minds are captivated
sāndra-moda-rasa-rūpam-	(of that) form which is concentrated inward joy and bliss
antaram	introvert (not based on contacts with external objects)
brahma rūpam-ayi te-	O Lord! Thy (Nirguna) aspect as Brahman
avabhāsate	(then) shines
O Lord! By thus performing dhyaana on Thee and getting captivated by the sweetness of Thy formful aspect (Saguna), I shall enjoy the concentrated bliss of Thy impersonal aspect (Nirguna), which shines as the Brahman.
tatsamāsvadanarūpiṇīṃ sthitiṃ tvatsamādhimayi viśvanāyaka |
āśritā: punarata: paricyutāvārabhemahi ca dhāraṇādikam ||7||
tat-samāsvadana-rūpiṇīm sthitiṃ	the state of immediate experience of Brahman
tvat-samādhim-	(thus established in) Samadhi in Thee
ayi viśvanāyaka	O Lord of the Universe!
āśritā:	having attained (that Samadhi)
puna:-ata:	again from there
paricyutau	(when ever my mind) slips down from it
ārabhemahi ca	then I shall resort (again)
dhāraṇā-ādikam	(from) the practice of Dhaarna etc.
O Lord of the Universe! When I have attained that state of experiencing Thee as the Brahman, i.e. Nirvikalpa Samaadhi, if I slip down from that state, I shall again start the meditation process from Dhaarana onwards.
itthamabhyasananirbharollasattvatparātmasukhakalpitotsavā: |
muktabhaktakulamaulitāṃ gatā: sañcarema śukanāradādivat ||8||
ittham-abhyasan-	in this manner practicing
anirbhara-ullasan-	self-supportively (freely) enjoying
tvat-parātma-sukha-	Thy Supreme bliss
kalpit-utsavā:	resulting from the experience (of Brahman) and reveling in it
mukta-bhakta-kula	amongst the clan of the liberated devotees,
maulitāṃ gatā:	attaining supremacy
sañcarema	(will) move about freely (free of attachments)
śuka-nārada-ādi-vat	like Shuka, Naarada and others
Thus having attained the joy of experiencing Thy Supreme Blissful state, O Lord! May I be the foremost of the liberated devotees and move about freely like Sri Shuka, Naarada and others.
tvatsamādhivijaye tu ya: punarmaṅkṣu mokṣarasika: krameṇa vā |
yogavaśyamanilaṃ ṣaḍāśrayairunnayatyaja suṣumnayā śanai: ||9||
tvat-samādhi-vijaye	on attaining Samaadhi in Thee
tu ya: puna:-	indeed, he again
maṅkṣu mokṣa-rasika:	(whether) desires immediate liberation
krameṇa vā	or gradual (liberation) (he)
yogavaśyam-	by power of yoga
anilaṃ	(controls) breath (vital energy)
ṣaḍ-āśrayai:-	through the six centres
unnayati-	raises up (vital energy)
aja	O Birthless One!
suṣumnayā	along with the Sushumnaa Naadi
śanai:	slowly
O Birthless Lord! After one achieves Thee in Samaadhi, he can opt for immediate liberation or gradual liberation. Accordingly through the power of yoga he raises up his vital breath through the six centres along the Sushumnaa Naadi.
liṅgadehamapi santyajannatho līyate tvayi pare nirāgraha: |
ūrdhvalokakutukī tu mūrdhata: sārdhameva karaṇairnirīyate ||10||
liṅga-deham-api	even the subtle body
santyajan-atha:	giving up, then
līyate	merges
tvayi pare	in Thee, the Supreme Brahman
nirāgraha:	the one who is desireless
ūrdhva-loka-kutukī tu	but the one who desires to go to higher spiritual worlds
mūrdhata:	through the orifice in the head ( Brahmarandhra)
sārdham-eva karaṇai:-	along with the subtle body
nirīyate	goes out
One who is desireless of visiting the other heavenly worlds, gives up (through his Aagyaa chakra) his gross body as well as the subtle bodies and merges in Thee. The one who desires to visit the heavenly regions before attaining liberation, goes out through the orifice in the crown of the head ( the Brahmarandhra).
agnivāsaravalarkṣapakṣagairuttarāyaṇajuṣā ca daivatai: |
prāpito ravipadaṃ bhavatparo modavān dhruvapadāntamīyate ||11||
agni-vāsara-valarkṣa-pakṣagai: -	Agni (fire), Vaasara (daytime), Valaraksh paksha (the bright fortnight-Shukla Paksha)
uttarāyaṇajuṣā	and the Uttaraayanaa
daivatai:	presided over by the respective deities
prāpito ravipadaṃ	(then) being led to the plane of the Sun
bhavat-para:	he who is devoted to Thee
modavān	while enjoying (the facilities of the various higher realms)
dhruvapadāntam īyate	is next led to the sphere of Dhruvaloka
O Lord! Thy devotee who follows the Krama Mukti path is led by the presiding deities of fire, day time, the bright fortnight, and Uttaraayana to the plane of the sun and enjoying in each of these spheres reaches the realm of Dhruva.
āsthito'tha maharālaye yadā śeṣavaktradahanoṣmaṇārdyate |
īyate bhavadupāśrayastadā vedhasa: padamata: puraiva vā ||12||
āsthita: atha maharālaye	residing there (in Dhruvaloka), then in Maharloka,
yadā śeṣavaktra-dahana-ūṣmaṇā-	when, by the heat emanating from the mouth of Aadishesha ( at the approach of the cosmic dissolution)
ārdyate	(he) is tormented
īyate	(he) reaches
bhavat-upāśraya: -	taking refuge in Thee alone
tadā	then
vedhasa: padam-	the world of Brahmaa (Brahmaloka)
ata: purā-eva vā	or even before that (before the fire)
Reaching the abode of Dhruva, he proceeds to Maharloka. When, at the approach of cosmic dissolution, fire emanates from the mouth of Aadishesh, and when he is tormented by the fire, he takes refuge in Thee and goes to the world of Brahma. He may choose to go to the world of Brahma even before the fire starts.
tatra vā tava pade'thavā vasan prākṛtapralaya eti muktatām |
svecchayā khalu purā vimucyate saṃvibhidya jagadaṇḍamojasā ||13||
tatra vā	either there (in Brahmaloka)
tava pade-athavā	or in Thy world (Vaikuntha)
vasan	residing
prākṛtapralaye	at the time of Prakrita pralaya
eti muktatām	he attains liberation
svecchayā khalu purā	(or) at his will even earlier, indeed
vimucyate	he becomes liberated
saṃvibhidya	piercing through
jagat-aṇḍam	the Brahmaanda (the cosmic sphere)
ojasā	by his yogic power
Residing there in Brahmaloka or in Thy abode, Vaikuntha, he is liberated at the time of Maha Pralaya. Or, if he so desires, he is liberated even earlier by piercing through the Brahmaanda and releasing himself by his yogic power.
tasya ca kṣitipayomaho'niladyomahatprakṛtisaptakāvṛtī: |
tattadātmakatayā viśan sukhī yāti te padamanāvṛtaṃ vibho ||14||
tasya ca	and of that (Brahmaanda)
kṣiti-payo-maha:-anila-dyo-mahat-prakṛti-	the spheres namely - earth, water, fire air, space, cosmic intelligence, and the primordial nature
saptaka-āvṛtī:	the seven barriers (of the cosmic sphere)
tat-tat-ātmakatayā viśan	transcending by realising his identity with each one of them
sukhī	enjoying bliss
yāti	reaches
te padam-anāvṛtaṃ	The unobstructed state (beyond all barriers)
vibho	O All Pervading Lord!
O All Pervading Lord! Thy devotee enters each of the seven sheaths of the cosmic sphere,i.e. earth, water, fire, air, space, the cosmic intelligence, and primordial nature. He enjoys the bliss thereof and transcends them to reach Thy unobstructed state -the merger in Thee, The Supreme Brahman.
arcirādigatimīdṛśīṃ vrajan vicyutiṃ na bhajate jagatpate |
saccidātmaka bhavat guṇodayānuccarantamanileśa pāhi mām ||15||
arci: - ādi-gatim-	the path of light etc
īdṛśīṃ	of this kind
vrajan	passing through which
vicyutiṃ	downfall (return to Sansaara)
na bhajate	(the yogi) does not suffer
jagatpate	O Lord of the Universe!
saccidātmaka	O Embodiment of pure existence consciousness
bhavat-guṇa-udayān	the glory of Thy excellences
uccarantam	(me who am) always singing
anileśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur
pāhi mām	protect me
O Lord of the Universe! The devotee who thus goes through the luminous path does not fall any more to the netherworlds. O Lord of Guruvaayur! The embodiment of pure consciousness absolute, please protect me, Thy devotee, who is ever singing Thy glories.